Our discussion on detection tools may have
left you wondering where alerts are sent
and how alerts are accessed
by security analysts.
This is where security information and
event management, or SIEM, tools are used.
SIEM is a tool that collects and
analyzes log data to monitor critical
activities in an organization.
SIEM provides security professionals with
a high-level overview of what goes on in
their networks.
How exactly does it do this?
Let's use an example of a car.
Cars have many different parts:
tires, lights, and
let's not forget all the internal
machinery that's under the hood.
There are many different
components of a car,
but how do you know if
one of them has an issue?
Aha, you guessed it!
The dashboard warning lights.
The dashboard notifies you
about information related to
the car's components, whether the tire
pressure or battery voltage is low,
you need to refuel, or
a door hasn't been properly closed.
A car's dashboard notifies you about
the status of the car's components, so
that you can take action to fix it.
SIEM tools work in a similar way.
Just like cars have many
different components,
a network can have thousands
of different devices and
systems, which make monitoring
them quite the challenge.
A car's dashboard gives the driver a clear
picture of the status of their car, so
they don't have to worry about
inspecting each component themselves.
Similarly, a SIEM looks at data flows
between all the different systems in
the network and analyzes them to provide a
real-time picture of any potential threats
to the network.
It does this by ingesting massive amounts
of data and categorizes this data, so
that it's easily accessible through
a centralized platform similar to a car's
dashboard.
Here's what the process looks like.
First, SIEM tools collect and
aggregate data.
This data is typically in the form of
logs, which are basically a record of
all the events that
happened on a given source.
Data can come from multiple sources
such as IDS or IPS, databases,
firewalls, applications, and more.
After all this data gets collected,
it gets aggregated.
Aggregation simply means all this
data from different data sources gets
centralized in one place.
Depending on the number of data
sources a SIEM collects from,
a huge volume of raw unedited
data can get collected.
And not all data that's collected
by a SIEM is relevant for
security analysis purposes.
Next, SIEM tools normalize data.
Normalization takes the raw data that
the SIEM has collected and cleans it up by
removing non essential attributes so
that only what's relevant is included.
Data normalization also creates
consistency in log records,
which is helpful when you're searching for
specific log information
during incident investigation.
Finally, the normalized data gets
analyzed according to configured rules.
SIEM analyzes the normalized data against
a rule set to detect any possible
security incidents, which then get
categorized or reported as alerts for
security analysts to review.
Now that you've explored
the capabilities of SIEM tools,
let's examine another
security management tool.
Security orchestration,
automation, and response, or
SOAR, is a collection of applications,
tools, and
workflows that uses automation
to respond to security events.
While SIEM tools collect, analyze, and
report on security events for
security analysts to review,
SOAR automates analysis and
response to security events and incidents.
SOAR can also be used to track and
manage cases.
Multiple incidents can form a case, and
SOAR offers a way to view all of these
incidents in one centralized place.
Well, there you have it. You've learned how
incident management tools like SIEM and SOAR
make it easier for security analysts
to see what's happening in a network and
to respond to any threats efficiently.